@node Big-O and the Doherty Threshold
@section Big-O: Algorithms in the Cloud Native Age

@quotation
...if it answers you back in less than 400 milliseconds, just under half a second, then you will stay glued to that machine for hours...
@author Joe MacMillan, Halt and Catch Fire
@end quotation

@imagec{images/big_o_architecture, High-level architecture: Go services feeding Prometheus metrics to Grafana.}



The **Big-O** project is an engineering exercise designed to take abstract Computer Science theory
and make it tangible through modern Platform Engineering practices. It implements two classic
sorting algorithms---Bubble Sort and Merge Sort---not just as functions, but as observable
microservices.

The goal is to visualize the degradation of performance in real-time, moving the concept of
"complexity" from a textbook definition to a measurable system metric.

@subsection The stack

The system is built to be deployed anywhere, from a local laptop to a production Kubernetes cluster.

@table @strong
@item Go 1.23+
The core algorithms are implemented in Go, utilizing its concurrency primitives to handle HTTP
requests while processing sorting workloads.

@item Prometheus & Grafana
We don't just print timings to stdout. The services are instrumented to expose Prometheus metrics. A
provisioned Grafana instance visualizes the divergence between $O(n^2)$ and $O(n \log n)$ as $N$
increases.

@item Docker & Compose
For rapid instantiation, a `docker-compose` stack brings up the sorting services, the UI, and the
observability stack in seconds.

@item Kubernetes (Kind)
The project includes production-ready K8s manifests. It uses liveness/readiness probes, resource
limits, and ConfigMaps, deployable via a local Kind cluster.
@end table

@subsection Deployment Options

The project utilizes a robust `Makefile` to abstract the complexity of the various deployment
targets.

@table @code
@item make demo
The comprehensive Docker Compose demonstration. It spins up the full stack and exposes the Grafana
dashboards at port 13000.

@item make demo-k8s
The full Kubernetes lifecycle. It builds the Docker images, loads them into the Kind cluster,
applies the manifests, and sets up port-forwarding for the UI and dashboards.

@item make run-screen
For local development without container overhead, this target utilizes GNU Screen to manage the
background processes and logs.
@end table

@subsection The Interface

While the backend generates the hard data, the frontend validates the **Doherty Threshold**. Built
with **Datastar**, the UI allows users to trigger sorts of varying sizes ($N=100$ to $N=50,000$).

@imagec{images/big_o_ui, The interactive UI comparison allowing users to feel the delay.}

The UI provides immediate visual feedback, allowing the user to "feel" the difference between a
400ms response (Merge Sort) and an 8-minute wait (Bubble Sort).

The source code and infrastructure definitions are available at the
@url{https://github.com/yourusername/big-o, Big-O Repository}.
